---
layout: post
title: Banerjee-Duflo's Poor Economics
---

Why would a man in Morocco who doesn't have enough to eat buy a television? Why do the poorest in India spend 7 percent of their food budget on sugar? Poor Economics, written by the winners of the 2019 Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences Abhijit V. Banerjee and Esther Duflo, is an eye-opening book that overturns the myths about what it is like to live on a very little, revealing the unexpected decisions that millions of people make every day.

This book emerges from the understanding of the economic lives of the poorest. The book has many theories that help us make sense of both: what the poor are able to achieve, and where and for what reason they need a push. The book touches on the essential aspects of people's family lives: what they buy, what they do about their children's education, the health of their children, parents and own, how many children they choose to have, and so on. The book talks about how markets and institutions work for the poor: can they borrow or save, what do governments do for them. Throughout the book returns to the same basic questions: are there ways for the poor to improve their lives, what is preventing them from being able to do these things.

Five key lessons listed in the book:
<ol>
<li>The poor often lack critical pieces of information and believe things that are not true. They are unsure about the benefits of immunizing children; they think there is little value in what is learned during the first few years of education; they don’t know how much fertilizer they need to use; they don’t know which is the easiest way to get infected with HIV; they don’t know what their politicians do when in office.</li>

<li>The poor bear responsibility for too many aspects of their lives. The richer you are, the more the “right” decisions are made for you. For instance, the poor have no piped water, and therefore do not benefit from the chlorine that the city government puts into the water supply. If they want clean drinking water, they have to purify it themselves. Such decisions are difficult for anyone as they require some thinking or some other small cost today, and the benefits are usually reaped in the distant future.</li>

<li>There are good reasons that some markets are missing for the poor, or that the poor face unfavorable prices in them. The poor get a negative interest rate from their savings accounts (if they are lucky enough to have an account) and pay exorbitant rates on their loans (if they can get one) because handling even a small quantity of money entails a fixed cost. The market for health insurance for the poor has not developed, despite the devastating effects of serious health problems in their lives, because the limited insurance options that can be sustained in the market (catastrophic health insurance, formulaic weather insurance) are not what the poor want.</li>

<li>Poor countries are not doomed to failure because they are poor, or because they have had an unfortunate history. It is true that things often do not work in these countries: Programs intended to help the poor end up in the wrong hands, teachers teach desultorily or not at all, roads weakened by the theft of materials collapse under the weight of overburdened trucks, and so forth. But many of these failures have less to do with some grand conspiracy of the elites to maintain their hold on the economy and more to do with some avoidable flaw in the detailed design of policies, and the ubiquitous three I’s: ignorance, ideology, and inertia.</li>

<li>Expectations about what people are able or unable to do all too often end up turning into self-fulfilling prophecies. Children give up on school when their teachers (and sometimes their parents) signal to them that they are not smart enough to master the curriculum; fruit sellers don’t make the effort to repay their debt because they expect that they will fall back into debt very quickly; nurses stop coming to work because nobody expects them to be there; politicians whom no one expects to perform have no incentive to try improving people’s lives.</li>
</ol>

This book is about what the lives and choices of the poor tell us about how to fight global poverty. It helps us understand, for example, why microfinance is useful without being the miracle some hoped it would be; why the poor often end up with healthcare that does them more harm than good; why children of the poor can go to school year after year and not learn anything; why the poor don't want health insurance. It reveals why so many magic bullets of yesterday have ended up as today's failed ideas. It tells a lot about where hope lies: why token subsidies might have more than token effects, why good jobs matter for growth. Above all, it makes clear why hope is vital and knowledge critical, why we have to keep on trying even when the challenge looks overwhelming. We have no lever guaranteed to eradicate poverty, but once we accept that, time is on our side. Poverty has been with us for many thousand years, so if we have to wait another fifty or a hundred years, so be it. At least we can stop pretending that there is any one-shot cure-all solution and instead join hands with millions of well-intentioned people in the quest for many ideas, big or small, that will eventually take us to the world where no one has to live on 99 cents per day.